POOR RICHARD'S ALMANAC AND
OTHER ACTIVITIES


In 1732 I first publish'd my Almanack, under the name of _Richard
Saunders_; it was continu'd by me about twenty-five years, commonly
call'd _Poor Richard's Almanac_.[74] I endeavour'd to make it both
entertaining and useful, and it accordingly came to be in such demand,
that I reap'd considerable profit from it, vending annually near ten
thousand. And observing that it was generally read, scarce any
neighborhood in the province being without it, I consider'd it as a
proper vehicle for conveying instruction among the common people, who
bought scarcely any other books; I therefore filled all the little
spaces that occurr'd between the remarkable days in the calendar with
proverbial sentences, chiefly such as inculcated industry and
frugality, as the means of procuring wealth, and thereby securing
virtue; it being more difficult for a man in want, to act always
honestly, as, to use here one of those proverbs, _it is hard for an
empty sack to stand upright_.

    [74] The almanac at that time was a kind of periodical as
    well as a guide to natural phenomena and the weather.
    Franklin took his title from _Poor Robin_, a famous
    English almanac, and from Richard Saunders, a well-known
    almanac publisher. For the maxims of Poor Richard, see
    pages 331-335.

These proverbs, which contained the wisdom of many ages and nations, I
assembled and form'd into a connected discourse prefix'd to the Almanack
of 1757, as the harangue of a wise old man to the people attending an
auction. The bringing all these scatter'd councils thus into a focus
enabled them to make greater impression. The piece, being universally
approved, was copied in all the newspapers of the Continent; reprinted
in Britain on a broadside, to be stuck up in houses; two translations
were made of it in French, and great numbers bought by the clergy and
gentry, to distribute gratis among their poor parishioners and tenants.
In Pennsylvania, as it discouraged useless expense in foreign
superfluities, some thought it had its share of influence in producing
that growing plenty of money which was observable for several years
after its publication.

Two pages from _Poor Richard's Almanac_ for 1736. Size of original.
Reproduced from a copy at the New York Public Library.

    _IV Mon._ June hath xxx days.

    Things that are bitter, bitterrer than Gall Physicians
    say are always physical: Now Women's Tongues if into
    Powder beaten, May in a Potion or a Pill be eaten, And
    as there's nought more bitter, I do muse, That Women's
    Tongues in Physick they ne'er use. My self and others
    who lead restless Lives, Would spare that bitter Member
    of our Wives.

 1 3 _fine weather_,                4  Le   4 36 8  Moon set 10 12 aft
 2 4  Ascension Day                 5  19   4 35 8 _He that can have_
 3 5  Mars Sat. Ven. _Sudden_       6  Vi   4 35 8 _Patience, can_
 4 6 _showers_                      6h 19   4 35 8 _have what he_
 5 7 _of Rain_.                     7  Li   4 35 8  First Quarter.
 6 C  Eraudi                        8  19   4 35 8 _will._
 7 2  Trine Mars Merc. _thunder_,   9  Sc   4 35 8  Le. Vi. Li.
 8 3 _perhaps hail._               10  17   4 35 8  Sun ent. Cn. today
 9 4  7* rise 2 15                 10  Sa   4 34 8  making longest
10 5 _very hot_,                   11  13   4 34 8  day 14 h. 51 m.
11 6  St. Barnabas.                12  26   4 34 8  Full Moon 12 day,
12 7 _then rain_.                   1  Cp   4 34 8  at 1 morn.
13 C  Whitsunday.                   2  20   4 35 8  Moon rise 8 20 aft.
14 2                                2h Aq   4 35 8 _Now I've a sheep_
15 3  K. Geo. II. procl             3  15   4 35 8 _and a cow, every_
16 4  ff. Sun Sat. _wind, rain_,    4  27   4 35 8 _body bids me good_
17 5  Sxtil Sat. Merc. _hail and_   5  Pi   4 35 8 _morrow._
18 6 _thunder_                      6  21   4 35 8  Moon rise 11 10 af.
19 7  Day shorter 2 m.              6h Ar   4 35 8
20 C  Trinity Sund.                 7  15   4 36 8  Last Quarter
21 2 _If we have rain about_        8  27   4 36 8 _God helps them_
22 3 _the Change_,                  9  Ta   4 36 8 _that help themselves_
23 4 _Let not my reader_           10  22   4 36 8
24 5  St. John Bap.                10  Gm   4 36 8  Moon rise 2 morn.
25 6  7* rise 1  8                 11  18   4 37 8 _Why does the_
26 7  vc Sun Jup. _think it_       12  Cn   4 37 8 _blind man's wife_
27 C _strange._                     1  16   4 38 8  New moon 27 day,
28 2  Sxtil Sat. Mars _hail and_    2  Le   4 38 8  near noon.
29 3  St. Peter & Paul              2h 15   4 39 8 _paint herself._
30 4  Square Mars Ven. _rain_.      3  Vi   4 40 8  Moon sets 9 30


    _V Mon._ July hath xxxi days.

    Who can charge _Ebrio_ with Thirst of Wealth? See he
    consumes his Money, Time and Health, In drunken Frolicks
    which will all confound, Neglects his Farm, forgets to
    till his Ground, His Stock grows less that might be kept
    with ease; In nought but Guts and Debts he finds
    Encrease. In Town reels as if he'd shove down each Wall,
    Yet Walls must stand, poor Soul, or he must fall.

 1 5   Day short 11 mi.             4  15   4 40 8 _None preaches_
 2 6   7* rise 12 32                5  Li   4 41 8 _better than the_
 3 7  _windy weather._              6  15   4 41 8 _ant, and she says_
 4 C   2 Sund. p Trinit             6h Sc   4 42 8  First Quarter.
 5 2   Vc Jup. Ven. _now_           7  14   4 43 8 _nothing._
 6 3  _pleasant weather_            8  27   4 44 8  Moon sets 12 30 m
 7 4  _some days_                   9  Sa   4 45 8 _The absent are_
 8 5  _together,_                  10  23   4 48 8 _never without_
 9 6  _but inclines to_            10  Cp   4 47 8 _fault, nor the_
10 7  _falling_                    11  18   4 48 8 _present without_
11 C   3 Sund. p. Trin.            12  Aq  4 49 8  Full moon 11 day,
12 2   Sxtil Sat. Merc. weather.    1  13   4 50 8  2 afternoon.
13 3   Dog-days begin               2  25   4 50 8  sun in Leo
14 4   Days 14h. 20 m               2h Pi   4 51 8  Moon rise 8 35 aft.
15 5   St. _Swithin_.               3  19   4 52 8 _excuse._
16 6   Le 1 Li                      4  Ar   4 53 8
17 7   conj. Sun Merc. _rain_       5  13   4 54 8 _Gifts burst_
18 C   7* rise 11 40                6  25   4 55 8 _rocks_
19 2  _hail or rain,_               6h Ta   4 56 8  Last Quarter.
20 3   Sxtil Sun Sat. thunder.      7  19   4 57 8  Moon rise 11 52 af
21 4   7* rise 11 18                8  Gm   4 57 8 _If wind blows on_
22 5  _then high_                   9  14   4 58 8 _you thro' a hole,_
23 6  _wind._                      10  27   4 59 8 _Make your will_
24 7   opp. Sun Jupiter            10  Cn   4 59 8 _and take care of_
25 C   St. James.                  11  25   5  0 7 _your soul._
26 2  _hail_                       12  Le   5  1 7  New moon 26 day,
27 3   Moon near cor Leo            1  24   5  2 7  near 8 aftern
28 4   opp. Jup. Ven. _a clear_     2  Vi   5  3 7  Moon sets 8 aftern
29 5  _air; and fine_               2h 24   5  4 7 _The rotten Apple_
30 6  _weather_                     3  Li   5  5 7 _spoils his_
31 7   7* rise 10 40                4  23   5  6 7 _Companion._

[Transcriber's note: Zodiac signs, aspects and symbols of the planets
have been replaced by their names and/or by their standard
abbreviations.

Ar=Aries, Ta=Taurus, Gm=Gemini, Cn=Cancer, Le=Leo, Vi=Virgo,
Li=Libra, Sc=Scorpio, Sa=Sagittarius, Cp=Capricorn, Aq=Aqua,
Pi=Pisces, Oppos=Opposition, Trine=Trine, Squr=Square,
Conj=Conjunction, Sxtil=Sextile, Qucnx= Quincunx.

Merc=Mercury, Ven=Venus, Mars=Mars, Jup=Jupiter, Sat=Saturn
Ura=Uranus, Nep=Neptune, Plu=Pluto.]

I considered my newspaper, also, as another means of communicating
instruction, and in that view frequently reprinted in it extracts from
the Spectator, and other moral writers; and sometimes publish'd little
pieces of my own, which had been first composed for reading in our
Junto. Of these are a Socratic dialogue, tending to prove that,
whatever might be his parts and abilities, a vicious man could not
properly be called a man of sense; and a discourse on self-denial,
showing that virtue was not secure till its practice became a
habitude, and was free from the opposition of contrary inclinations.
These may be found in the papers about the beginning of 1735.[75]

    [75] June 23 and July 7, 1730.--Smyth.

In the conduct of my newspaper, I carefully excluded all libeling and
personal abuse, which is of late years become so disgraceful to our
country. Whenever I was solicited to insert anything of that kind, and
the writers pleaded, as they generally did, the liberty of the press,
and that a newspaper was like a stage-coach, in which anyone who would
pay had a right to a place, my answer was, that I would print the
piece separately if desired, and the author might have as many copies
as he pleased to distribute himself, but that I would not take upon me
to spread his detraction; and that, having contracted with my
subscribers to furnish them with what might be either useful or
entertaining, I could not fill their papers with private altercation,
in which they had no concern, without doing them manifest injustice.
Now, many of our printers make no scruple of gratifying the malice of
individuals by false accusations of the fairest characters among
ourselves, augmenting animosity even to the producing of duels; and
are, moreover, so indiscreet as to print scurrilous reflections on the
government of neighboring states, and even on the conduct of our best
national allies, which may be attended with the most pernicious
consequences. These things I mention as a caution to young printers,
and that they may be encouraged not to pollute their presses and
disgrace their profession by such infamous practices, but refuse
steadily, as they may see by my example that such a course of conduct
will not, on the whole, be injurious to their interests.

In 1733 I sent one of my journeymen to Charleston, South Carolina,
where a printer was wanting. I furnish'd him with a press and letters,
on an agreement of partnership, by which I was to receive one-third of
the profits of the business, paying one-third of the expense. He was a
man of learning, and honest but ignorant in matters of account; and,
tho' he sometimes made me remittances, I could get no account from
him, nor any satisfactory state of our partnership while he lived. On
his decease, the business was continued by his widow, who, being born
and bred in Holland, where, as I have been inform'd, the knowledge of
accounts makes a part of female education, she not only sent me as
clear a state as she could find of the transactions past, but
continued to account with the greatest regularity and exactness every
quarter afterwards, and managed the business with such success, that
she not only brought up reputably a family of children, but, at the
expiration of the term, was able to purchase of me the printing-house,
and establish her son in it.

I mention this affair chiefly for the sake of recommending that branch
of education for our young females, as likely to be of more use to
them and their children, in case of widowhood, than either music or
dancing, by preserving them from losses by imposition of crafty men,
and enabling them to continue, perhaps, a profitable mercantile house,
with establish'd correspondence, till a son is grown up fit to
undertake and go on with it, to the lasting advantage and enriching of
the family.

About the year 1734 there arrived among us from Ireland a young
Presbyterian preacher, named Hemphill, who delivered with a good
voice, and apparently extempore, most excellent discourses, which drew
together considerable numbers of different persuasions, who join'd in
admiring them. Among the rest, I became one of his constant hearers,
his sermons pleasing me, as they had little of the dogmatical kind,
but inculcated strongly the practice of virtue, or what in the
religious stile are called good works. Those, however, of our
congregation, who considered themselves as orthodox Presbyterians,
disapprov'd his doctrine, and were join'd by most of the old clergy,
who arraign'd him of heterodoxy before the synod, in order to have him
silenc'd. I became his zealous partisan, and contributed all I could
to raise a party in his favour, and we combated for him awhile with
some hopes of success. There was much scribbling pro and con upon the
occasion; and finding that, tho' an elegant preacher, he was but a
poor writer, I lent him my pen and wrote for him two or three
pamphlets, and one piece in the Gazette of April, 1735. Those
pamphlets, as is generally the case with controversial writings, tho'
eagerly read at the time, were soon out of vogue, and I question
whether a single copy of them now exists.[76]

    [76] See "A List of Books written by, or relating to
    Benjamin Franklin," by Paul Leicester Ford. 1889. p.
    15.--Smyth.

During the contest an unlucky occurrence hurt his cause exceedingly.
One of our adversaries having heard him preach a sermon that was much
admired, thought he had somewhere read the sermon before, or at least
a part of it. On search, he found that part quoted at length, in one
of the British Reviews, from a discourse of Dr. Foster's.[77] This
detection gave many of our party disgust, who accordingly abandoned
his cause, and occasion'd our more speedy discomfiture in the synod. I
stuck by him, however, as I rather approv'd his giving us good sermons
composed by others, than bad ones of his own manufacture, tho' the
latter was the practice of our common teachers. He afterward
acknowledg'd to me that none of those he preach'd were his own;
adding, that his memory was such as enabled him to retain and repeat
any sermon after one reading only. On our defeat, he left us in search
elsewhere of better fortune, and I quitted the congregation, never
joining it after, tho' I continu'd many years my subscription for the
support of its ministers.

    [77] Dr. James Foster (1697-1753):--

        "Let modest Foster, if he will excel
         Ten metropolitans in preaching well."

              --Pope (Epilogue to the Satires, I, 132).

    "Those who had not heard Farinelli sing and Foster
    preach were not qualified to appear in genteel company,"
    Hawkins. "History of Music."--Smyth.

I had begun in 1733 to study languages; I soon made myself so much a
master of the French as to be able to read the books with ease. I then
undertook the Italian. An acquaintance, who was also learning it, us'd
often to tempt me to play chess with him. Finding this took up too
much of the time I had to spare for study, I at length refus'd to play
any more, unless on this condition, that the victor in every game
should have a right to impose a task, either in parts of the grammar
to be got by heart, or in translations, etc., which tasks the
vanquish'd was to perform upon honour, before our next meeting. As we
play'd pretty equally, we thus beat one another into that language. I
afterwards with a little painstaking, acquir'd as much of the Spanish
as to read their books also.

I have already mention'd that I had only one year's instruction in a
Latin school, and that when very young, after which I neglected that
language entirely. But, when I had attained an acquaintance with the
French, Italian, and Spanish, I was surpris'd to find, on looking over
a Latin Testament, that I understood so much more of that language
than I had imagined, which encouraged me to apply myself again to the
study of it, and I met with more success, as those preceding languages
had greatly smooth'd my way.

From these circumstances, I have thought that there is some
inconsistency in our common mode of teaching languages. We are told
that it is proper to begin first with the Latin, and, having acquir'd
that, it will be more easy to attain those modern languages which are
deriv'd from it; and yet we do not begin with the Greek, in order more
easily to acquire the Latin. It is true that, if you can clamber and
get to the top of a staircase without using the steps, you will more
easily gain them in descending; but certainly, if you begin with the
lowest you will with more ease ascend to the top; and I would
therefore offer it to the consideration of those who superintend the
education of our youth, whether, since many of those who begin with
the Latin quit the same after spending some years without having made
any great proficiency, and what they have learnt becomes almost
useless, so that their time has been lost, it would not have been
better to have begun with the French, proceeding to the Italian, etc.;
for, tho', after spending the same time, they should quit the study of
languages and never arrive at the Latin, they would, however, have
acquired another tongue or two, that, being in modern use, might be
serviceable to them in common life.[78]

    [78] "The authority of Franklin, the most eminently
    practical man of his age, in favor of reserving the
    study of the dead languages until the mind has reached a
    certain maturity, is confirmed by the confession of one
    of the most eminent scholars of any age.

    "'Our seminaries of learning,' says Gibbon, 'do not
    exactly correspond with the precept of a Spartan king,
    that the child should be instructed in the arts which
    will be useful to the man; since a finished scholar may
    emerge from the head of Westminster or Eton, in total
    ignorance of the business and conversation of English
    gentlemen in the latter end of the eighteenth century.
    But these schools may assume the merit of teaching all
    that they pretend to teach, the Latin and Greek
    languages.'"--Bigelow.

After ten years' absence from Boston, and having become easy in my
circumstances, I made a journey thither to visit my relations, which I
could not sooner well afford. In returning, I call'd at Newport to see
my brother, then settled there with his printing-house. Our former
differences were forgotten, and our meeting was very cordial and
affectionate. He was fast declining in his health, and requested of me
that, in case of his death, which he apprehended not far distant, I
would take home his son, then but ten years of age, and bring him up
to the printing business. This I accordingly perform'd, sending him a
few years to school before I took him into the office. His mother
carried on the business till he was grown up, when I assisted him with
an assortment of new types, those of his father being in a manner worn
out. Thus it was that I made my brother ample amends for the service I
had depriv'd him of by leaving him so early.

[Illustration: "Our former differences were forgotten, and our
meeting was very cordial and affectionate"]

In 1736 I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old, by the
small-pox, taken in the common way. I long regretted bitterly, and
still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. This I
mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation, on the
supposition that they should never forgive themselves if a child died
under it; my example showing that the regret may be the same either
way, and that, therefore, the safer should be chosen.

Our club, the Junto, was found so useful, and afforded such
satisfaction to the members, that several were desirous of introducing
their friends, which could not well be done without exceeding what we
had settled as a convenient number, viz., twelve. We had from the
beginning made it a rule to keep our institution a secret, which was
pretty well observ'd; the intention was to avoid applications of
improper persons for admittance, some of whom, perhaps, we might find
it difficult to refuse. I was one of those who were against any
addition to our number, but, instead of it, made in writing a
proposal, that every member separately should endeavour to form a
subordinate club, with the same rules respecting queries, etc., and
without informing them of the connection with the Junto. The
advantages proposed were, the improvement of so many more young
citizens by the use of our institutions; our better acquaintance with
the general sentiments of the inhabitants on any occasion, as the
Junto member might propose what queries we should desire, and was to
report to the Junto what pass'd in his separate club; the promotion of
our particular interests in business by more extensive recommendation,
and the increase of our influence in public affairs, and our power of
doing good by spreading thro' the several clubs the sentiments of the
Junto.

The project was approv'd, and every member undertook to form his club,
but they did not all succeed. Five or six only were compleated, which
were called by different names, as the Vine, the Union, the Band, etc.
They were useful to themselves, and afforded us a good deal of
amusement, information, and instruction, besides answering, in some
considerable degree, our views of influencing the public opinion on
particular occasions, of which I shall give some instances in course
of time as they happened.

My first promotion was my being chosen, in 1736, clerk of the General
Assembly. The choice was made that year without opposition; but the
year following, when I was again propos'd (the choice, like that of
the members, being annual), a new member made a long speech against
me, in order to favour some other candidate. I was, however, chosen,
which was the more agreeable to me, as, besides the pay for the
immediate service as clerk, the place gave me a better opportunity of
keeping up an interest among the members, which secur'd to me the
business of printing the votes, laws, paper money, and other
occasional jobbs for the public, that, on the whole, were very
profitable.

I therefore did not like the opposition of this new member, who was a
gentleman of fortune and education, with talents that were likely to
give him, in time, great influence in the House, which, indeed,
afterwards happened. I did not, however, aim at gaining his favour by
paying any servile respect to him, but, after some time, took this
other method. Having heard that he had in his library a certain very
scarce and curious book, I wrote a note to him, expressing my desire
of perusing that book, and requesting he would do me the favour of
lending it to me for a few days. He sent it immediately, and I
return'd it in about a week with another note, expressing strongly my
sense of the favour. When we next met in the House, he spoke to me
(which he had never done before), and with great civility; and he ever
after manifested a readiness to serve me on all occasions, so that we
became great friends, and our friendship continued to his death. This
is another instance of the truth of an old maxim I had learned, which
says, _"He that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do
you another, than he whom you yourself have obliged."_ And it shows
how much more profitable it is prudently to remove, than to resent,
return, and continue inimical proceedings.

In 1737, Colonel Spotswood, late governor of Virginia, and then
postmaster-general, being dissatisfied with the conduct of his deputy
at Philadelphia, respecting some negligence in rendering, and
inexactitude of his accounts, took from him the commission and offered
it to me. I accepted it readily, and found it of great advantage; for,
tho' the salary was small, it facilitated the correspondence that
improv'd my newspaper, increas'd the number demanded, as well as the
advertisements to be inserted, so that it came to afford me a
considerable income. My old competitor's newspaper declin'd
proportionately, and I was satisfy'd without retaliating his refusal,
while postmaster, to permit my papers being carried by the riders.
Thus he suffer'd greatly from his neglect in due accounting; and I
mention it as a lesson to those young men who may be employ'd in
managing affairs for others, that they should always render accounts,
and make remittances, with great clearness and punctuality. The
character of observing such a conduct is the most powerful of all
recommendations to new employments and increase of business.




XI